<syllabus objectives>

8.1 Arrangement of elements
1. Describe the Periodic Table as an arrangement of elements in periods and groups and in order of increasing proton number / atomic number
2. Describe the change from metallic to non-metallic character across a period
3 Describe the relationship between group number and the charge of the ions formed from elements in that group
4 Explain similarities in the chemical properties of elements in the same group of the Periodic Table in terms of their electronic configuration
5 Explain how the position of an element in the Periodic Table can be used to predict its properties
6. Identify trends in groups, given information about the elements

8.2 Group I properties
1. Describe the Group I alkali metals, lithium, sodium and potassium, as relatively soft metals with general trends down the group, limited to:
(a) decreasing melting point
(b) increasing density
(c) increasing reactivity
2. Predict the properties of other elements in Group I, given information about the elements

8.3 Group VII properties

1. Describe the Group VII halogens, chlorine, bromine and iodine, as diatomic non-metals with general trends down the group, limited to:
(a) increasing density
(b) decreasing reactivity
2. State the appearance of the halogens at r.t.p. as:
(a) chlorine, a pale yellow-green gas
(b) bromine, a red-brown liquid
(c) iodine, a grey-black solid
3. Describe and explain the displacement reactions of halogens with other halide ions
4. Predict the properties of other elements in Group VII, given information about the elements

8.4 Transition elements
1. Describe the transition elements as metals that:
(a) have high densities
(b) have high melting points
(c) form coloured compounds
(d) often act as catalysts as elements and in compounds
2. Describe transition elements as having ions with variable oxidation numbers, including iron(II) and iron(III)

8.5 Noble gases
1 Describe the Group VIII noble gases as unreactive, monatomic gases and explain this in terms of electronic configuration

</syllabus objectives>


<Teacher Notes>
Student were taught that two factors determine the strength of electrostatic attraction between positive and negative charge centers (in the context of periodic table these centres are nucleus at the centre of the atom and the valence electrons of a given atom). these factors are magnitude of the charge and the distance between the charges. The larger the magnitude the stronger will be the attraction. This explains the decrease in the atomic size within a period as we move from left to right. The nucleus charge increases gradually and hence the attractions that pull the valence electrons closer towards the nucleus.
Whereas the atomic size and the force of nuclear attraction at the valence shell decreases down the group. this explains the increase in reactivity of the first group metals down the group: easier to lose the electrons. and decrease in reactivity of the halogens: less attraction at the valence region due to the increased distance.
</Teacher Notes> 